This video is brought to you by Squarespace from websites and online stores to
marketing tools and analytics.
Squarespace is the all in one platform to build a beautiful online presence and
run your business. Head to squarespace.com for a free trial.
And when you're ready to launch,
go to squarespace.com/biographics to save 10% of your first
purchase of a website or a domain,
Without a doubt.
One of the most exciting periods in history was the industrial revolution that
perhaps no other time,
was there a greater feeling that the sky was the limit innovations happened one
after another,
and they all seemed destined to change the world forever assuredly.
One of the most important novelties of the 19th century was the railway.
It marked a decisive shift in how people could travel a world distances that
previously seemed unreachable were now just a day or two away.
And we might have never enjoyed this revolution without George Stevenson.
A man absolutely named the father of the railways Stevenson was completely
self-made.
He was a man born into a family of illiterates,
a man who couldn't read himself until he was 18.
And he had to get his first job at the age of eight to help support his family.
And yet he became one of the most successful and innovative engineers in British
history and day. We are looking at his incredible story.
George Stevenson was born on June the ninth,
1781 in Wiam Northlands in English village,
situated on the banks of the riverine.
He was the second of six children to Robert and Mabel Steven and,
and they all lived together in just one room of a house that contained three
other families while was a coal town located just a few miles from Newcastle.
Most blue collar laborers worked at the nearby collary as did George's father
Robert or old Bob, as he was known in town.
The Stevensons were well liked in the village. Mabel.
The daughter of a dire from Ingham was as being a woman with a delicate
constitution, but overall,
a real canny body S Bob was popular with the local children.
He used to gather by the engine fire as he was tending it.
And listen to Bob tell stories. They were nice people,
but they were completely uneducated. Both parents were illiterate.
And so with the children,
because the family was too poor to afford education for any of unsurprisingly
under these conditions,
it was expected that the boys would eventually join their father and work in a
coal mine.
George was eager to help out the family and got his first paying job when he was
just eight years old,
by then the Stevensons had moved dearly burn and old Bob worked at the coy
there, young George or George, as he was called,
found employments with his neighbor,
a widow who intu pins a day to keep an on cows while they grazed and make sure
that they didn't stray into the neighboring lands.
It was easy work that afforded the boy lots of free time,
which he dedicated to two of his favorite pursuits,
watching birds and making engines out of clay. As he grew up,
George took on more jobs on the farm until he was old enough to start working in
the coal mine, alongside his father and elder brother, James by necessity.
The Stevensons moved around a bit.
Whenever a mine started to dry up into another one was open someplace else.
However, George never found it difficult to secure a new job as he was hardwork
conscientious and strong.
By the time a teenager, he fulfilled his ambition of becoming an engine. Man.
It was clear that George had a fascination with engines ever since his
childhood. Now that he had his desired position.
He worked every day with engines and took time to clean and study and understand
every component. When he was 18.
George Stevenson realized that there was a hard limit on how much he could learn
without being able to read. So he sought to correct this floor.
He used his MIGA salary and began attending night school.
And by the time he was 19, he knew how to read and could also write his name.
Then he moved on to a better, more expensive teacher who taught him arithmetic.
And George soon discovered that he had a talent for working with numbers.
This was George's life for several more years.
He moved on from one mind to another being promoted.
As he became more experienced,
he met a woman named Francis Henderson and the two married in 1802.
They had a son Robert a year later and of course Robert Stevenson would go on
to become a great engineer in his own, right?
Perhaps even greater than his father.
Unfortunately George's life would be soon marked with tragedy in 1806,
Francis died of tuber or consumption as he was called back then leaving him
heartbroken.
Then George left for Scotland for a while after securing a well paid position
there, he saved up quite a bit of money, but when he returned,
he discovered that his father had met a serious accident on the job after being
struck with the steam blast of the face.
The injury had left old Bob blind infirm and in poverty.
George used most of his money to cover his father's debts and to secure a nice
cottage for him to live out the rest of his days
Before he got involved with railways,
George Stevenson had another important invention to his credit. The safety lamp,
this invention brought him into conflict with esteem.
Scientists are Humphrey Davey over who had the better design and who came up
with it first back in Stevenson's time, working in a coal mine,
it was very dangerous. It still is to be fair.
But back then explosions were a regular problem caused by build ups of various
flamable gases, collectively referred to as fire amp.
There was a big one in 1806 at the pit in west,
or where Stevenson worked as Brisman, which killed 10 people.
And George witnessed it firsthand by far,
the most destructive disaster occurred at failing pits on may the 25th,
18, 12 92 men and boys, some as young as 80 years old were killed in the blast.
But this finally prompted demands that mining safety standards needed to change.
What minors needed was a say safety lamp.
One that would provide adequate light without having a naked flame that could
trigger explosions.
Ideally it would also alert the miners if they were in a dangerous situation
with a lot of gas building up around them in 1815,
they got not one but two such devices to choose from.
There was the DVY lamp and there was Stevenson's Jordy lamp. By that point,
Humphrey DVY had already been Knight and was considered one of the preeminent
scientists in England.
His safety lamp perceived a lot of attention and was quickly adopted throughout
most of the country.
That was except for the Northeast of England where the Jordy lamp was far more
popular,
perhaps out of a sense camaraderie as it was designed by one of their own.
Each lamp had its benefits and drawbacks.
The Davy lamp incase the flame in a screen made out of iron Gores while
Stevenson used paper.
Therefore that Jordy lamp admitted a brighter light, but it was more fragile.
The more important distinction was that Stevenson's lamp had a separate inlet
and exhaust the opening of the inlet could be adjusted.
So that enough air needed to like the lamp would pass through.
If the amount of fire dam began to increase to unsafe levels,
then not enough air would enter the lamp. And the flame would simply extinguish.
This would not only prevent an explosion,
but also alert the miners that they were in a dangerous situation. However,
a strong current could force a lot of air inside the lamp and greatly enlarge
the flame, making the lamp to hot,
to handle the world at large preferred the Davy lamp.
Not necessarily because it was better, but because of who invented it. In fact,
D and his supporters all accused Stevenson of stealing his design curiously Davy
himself faced the same accusation from an Irish inventor named William Reed clan
who built his version of a safety lamp in 18, 13,
2 years before both other men, the clan lamp, however,
used a bellows and a pair of water tanks to keep an isolated flame burning
inside a metal case with a glass window. It was heavy on wily,
dim and required a man to operate it continuously.
So it was never used much in practice. Moreover,
it was distinct enough from the other two lamps that nobody truly considered
that Davy or Stevenson road, any design ideas from it.
The world remembers Humphrey DVY as the inventor of the safety lamp. Indeed,
the Royal society awarded him the Rumford med offer his efforts in 1816,
as well as a 1000 pound prize.
This was in addition to another 2000 pounds,
which DVY received from the colory owners of England. Meanwhile,
the same colory owners only gave Stevenson a hundred Gus. It was pretty clear.
The scientific community of England signed with Davy.
Many of them simply refused to believe that an uneducated working class man,
like Stevenson could invent such a device by using only intuition,
common sense and trial and error.
And yet that's exactly what happens unhappy with the way their self-made
engineer was treated. South.
The Northern committee was formed in Newcastle to help determine priority for
the safety lamp. In favor of Stevenson, they established a timeline.
DVY presented his lamp to the Royal society on November the ninth, 1815,
his earliest communication regarding the lamp was in a letter to a friend dated
October the 30th. And yet on October,
the 21st Stevenson had already begun using a modified oil lamp for early trials.
Based on the evidence,
the Newcastle committee raised another thousand pounds and awarded it to George
Stevenson for his Jordy lamp.
The most probable story is that neither man stole anything from the other.
They just had similar ideas around the same time, even.
So this experience spread a lifelong distrust of London intellectuals for
Stevenson. He made sure to educate his son,
Robert in a private school so that he would get rid of the thick Northern
accents that his father had,
which he believed negatively influenced other people's impression of him.
Now you might not need to go to a private school to have your accent change,
to make a good impression. Thus,
if your business is on the internet today and it should be,
you still need to make a good impression online.
And you can do that with today's sponsor Squarespace, Squarespace empowers.
And that's the word in there? Add copy. It's not mine, but I like it.
It empowers dreamers makers, doers.
It gives them the tools to bring their creative ideas to life and square.
Make it very easy to do. They have this all in one platform.
You just go in there, you claim a domain, you build a website.
If you wanna even sell something, you can do that too.
There's no fussing around with getting a domain name from one place,
bringing it over to another, linking it together,
and then working out how you make a store integrate with your website on
Squarespace. It's all done in one nice form. And that's a, all there is to it.
Plus it's not gonna look too Shay either. Might not look too Shay. I mean,
it's gonna look great. They've got award-winning templates,
which is a great starting point. Then you go in, you customize it,
however you want it. And it looks great afterwards.
Plus 24 7 support in case you get stuck, but you probably won't.
There's also email marketing.
So you can keep into much with your fans or your customers and look Squarespace.
They just make everything easier. Go get their domain,
build that website and start by heading to squarespace.com for a free trial.
And when you're ready to launch,
go to squarespace.com/biographics and you'll save 10% off your first
purchase of a website or a domain
Around the same time that Stevenson began working on the safety lamp.
He also designed and built his first steam locomotive while working at the
Killingworth collary as engine, right?
He already employed the use of stationary engines to improve the transport of
coal, but he became convinced that a locomotive or traveling engine us,
he called it back then would be even more efficient.
He had plenty of inspiration because George Stevenson his nickname,
the father of the railways,
some people incorrectly assume that he built the very first steam locomotive,
but that's not the case. That honor is usually given to British mining engineer,
Richard Trevor thick on February the 21st 1804, his machine,
which he never bothered to name, but became known as the penny.
Darren locomotive made the first railway journey.
Traveling nine miles from penny,
Darren iron works to the mur Cardiff canal in south Wales.
The engine never made it back because a bold she and the boiler leaked,
but it did haul five wagons carrying 70 men and 10 tons of iron showing
mine owners, every aware the potential for locomotives even.
So Trevor fix machine proved to be too heavy and the rails couldn't support its
weight.
It wasn't until 1812 that John Blanken so designed and Matthew Murray built
Sal man, the first practical and commercially successful steam locomotive,
unsurprisingly, given his passion for engines. As soon as Stevenson heard of it,
he wanted to build his own locomotive.
He convinced the higher up at the Killingworth coy to fund his project.
And on July the 21st, 18, 14,
the first Stevenson locomotive made its made in voy.
He named it blue share after PRUs and Jenn or Gahar Libra on Blucher
who had recently defeat Napoleon at the battle of live RGS.
A year later would go on to Baim Waterloo as well. The locomotive works,
but it left a lot to be dessert. It was clunky jerky loud.
And from a financial perspective,
it was just about as economical as the traditional horse drawn carriages.
Despite the floors Stevenson was allowed to keep working on new and improved
designs. Unfortunately, blue share did not survive long as the engineer to it,
to pieces and reused the parts to save on costs. In total.
This is said that George Stevenson built 16 locomotives at Killingworth,
although they are not well documented
Following his project at Killingworth Stevenson,
officially established himself as one of the top names in his field.
He was next tasked not with designing a new locomotive,
but with building a new railway. Sure.
The locomotives were the ones that got all the attention,
but the truth of the matter was that railways needed to be modernized as well.
The old ones were generally made out of wood and they were simply not sturdy
enough to handle the weight that could be transported by steam engines. In 18,
19 Stevenson was asked to build an eight mile railroad for the hat and coy near
Sunland. By this point, his son,
Robert had joins the family business and helped his father with his building
project like George.
He showed a passion for engineering at a young age and would lend a hands
whenever it was needed.
Steve Vincent used cast iron for the railway instead of wood.
It wasn't an ideal material as it was brittle,
but George considered it the best choice available.
He would later switch to rot iron because it was more malleable than therefore a
better alternative, even though he lost money,
as it meant not using his own patented design that in coy railway was opened in
1822 and it was the first railway to be operated entirely without animal power.
Afterwards,
that building projects kept getting bigger and more ambitious for Stevenson who
was next tasked with building a much longer 25 mile railway that connected coal
mines between the cities of Stockton and Darlington and county Durham.
Although to say he was tasked would be a bit disingenuous as Stevenson lobbied
pretty hard for the project.
Initially it was intended to use horse drawn wagons,
but the engineer convinced the city and mining officials that a steam locomotive
would be faster, more efficient and more practical. In the end,
it would become a mixed railway that used both methods of locomotion
construction on the Stockton and Darlington railway began in 1822 and it was
opened on September the 27th of 1825.
The railway was notable for multiple reasons, chief among them.
The fact that it became the first public line to carry passengers by steam
locomotive. And with that railway travel had officially arrived. It was delayed,
it was over budget, but it was still a landmark moment.
Stevenson was no fool.
He realized that railway transportation was only gonna get bigger.
More lines would be built perhaps even an entire network all over England.
That meant that a lot of locomotives would be needed and someone had to build
them. So why not him with that in mind,
the Robert Stevenson and company locomotive manufacturing business was hundred
in 1823. The first engine,
the company built was also the first to travel on the Stockton and Darlington
railway originally named active. By the time it was finished,
it had been re christened locomotion. Number one,
it was used in the maiden voyage of the railway reaching speeds of up to 15
miles per hour, besides wagons full of coal.
It also had a coach named experiment which had been especi.
He designed to carry passengers. Of course,
this coach could only see so many people,
but many others were perfectly content riding in the cargo wagons just to be a
part of this historic journey.
It should be noted that the first trip that transported both people in cargo was
intended as a one off afterwards locomotion number one,
and the engines that followed it resumed standard D duties of transporting only
coal. The experiment was still used for passenger travel,
but it was pools by horses because it would've been too expensive to use a
locomotive just for one coach.
It would be a few more years until the first true steam powered railroad would
be open for business.
That railway would come in 1830 when George Stevenson finished his crowning
achievements,
the first ever inter city railway intended for both passenger and cargo
transport powered entirely by steam locomotives.
It went from Liverpool to Manchester stretching over 31 miles and no horse drawn
carriages were allowed on it at any time.
The line was responsible for a bunch of other world firsts,
such as the first railway to use signaling the first function as a male delivery
service and the first to have double tracks along its entire length,
meaning that locomotives could travel in both directions unimpeded,
despite all these accolades building the railway included one obstacle after
another, especially for who served as chief engineer.
It all started in 1824.
When the Liverpool and Manchester railway company was actually founded.
The men in charge, mostly consisted of merchants, politicians,
and other officials from these two cities. These were two of the countries,
biggest business hubs, particularly textiles at the time,
but transporting communication between them was in efficient.
There were two options,
the canals which were slow and the roads which were dangerous and congested,
a railway would've been superior to both of them.
First off Stevenson needed to find a route that was suitable for his purposes.
He soon discovered that many men objected to the idea of a railway passing
through their lands.
Some even going to the extreme length of hiring LUS to keep away surveyors
Stevenson finally finished his survey,
but it was rejected by parliament for being inaccurate.
He made another one and it was rejected for the same reason as it turned out.
He made a major miscalculation in his estimates in order to cross a boggy area
named chat MOS,
the railway would cost up to five times as much as he reported in 1826.
George Stevenson was fired as engineer and was replaced by George and John Reny
alongside Charles Viola who served as their project got approval
from parliament in 1826. Fortunately for Stevenson, despite his mistakes,
a committee behind the Liverpool and Manchester railway company insisted that he
was hire back as the engineer for the actual construction.
An interesting tidbit here is that this was the first time Stevenson used a
gauge that measured four foot and eight inches or 1.4, three, five meters,
which would then become known as the Stevenson gauge.
And later the standard gauge as it became adopted worldwide in railways,
the gauge is simply the width between the tracks measured between the inner
signs of the rails.
Back then there was no standard and engineers built tracks at whatever distance
they felt was best Brinell. For example,
another one of England's greatest engineers favored the seven foot gauge.
Eventually parliament stepped in and passed the gauge act in 80 46,
making the Stevens engage the standard throughout great Britain.
So that locomotives and wagons could be used on more than just the original
railway they were built for from an engineering perspective,
the inner city railway was a massive undertaking Stevenson had to design the
Wapping tunnel. The first of its kind to be bored under a big city,
64 bridges and fire a had to be built for the this 30 mile stretch of railway.
And yet, despite all this effort,
it almost came to be that the line would function without locomotives.
What the committee wanted was a fast way to move cargo and people between
Liverpool and Manchester. And for that, they got the railway.
What they weren't sold on was the locomotives.
They thought that it would be better to use stationary steam engines placed
points along the route, which would pull the wagons using cables,
unsurprisingly Stevenson disagreed and convinced them to stage a competition to
see which method was best taking place. In October, 1829.
It became known as the rain hill trials truth be told.
They probably could have sorted this out quietly one afternoon,
but with the opening of the line fast approach,
they thought that a little publicity wouldn't hurt.
So they turned the whole thing into a massive event.
There was even a 500 pound prize and anyone was allowed to enter as long as
their machine met, certain criteria, 10 engines entered the competition,
but only five were already on the day.
They included cycle pairs at locomotive that was still drawn by horses.
The Stevensons design lined a new locomotive,
especially for this competition and named it rocket.
It would've been pretty embarrassing if they ended up not having the best
machine for the railway they built,
but the father and son team had no cost to worry.
Rocket was not only the fastest engine,
but also the only one that managed to complete the trials.
It was decided that Stevenson locomotives would be used for the railway.
The grands open took place on the 15th of September, 1830, the prime minister,
the duke of Wellington had his own special carriage as did many other esteemed
guests, such as politicians and foreign ambassadors.
The festivities were only slightly marred by the fact that the member of
parliament for Liverpool,
William Huskison was accidentally run over and killed by one of the trains.
Thus having the I distinction of becoming the first reported railway casualty
From then on the Stevenson company always had more work offers than it could
handle as the British rail way network kept growing for some of them.
They only built locomotives for others. They constructed the entire railroad.
Well for some, they only did the survey. And of course on many railways,
they did all three, even. So starting in the mid 1830s,
Robert Stevenson began taking on the role of chief engineer while his father
took a more passive role after decades of hard labor,
ever since he was a small child,
George Stevenson was content with stepping back a bit and letting his son build
on his accomplishments and his reputation in later life Stevenson often served
as a consultant, not only for his own company,
but also for foreign railroad developers,
particularly the Americans he gave to a on railways and took on various
positions,
such as being the first president of the institution of mechanical engineers in
London, in his personal life Stevenson married two more times,
but had no more children. He bought various as estates using the large wealth.
He had accumulated the last of which being tapped in house and Darba share
there. He became a very keen garden ORs ever.
The engineer gave the world one last invention. The cucumber straighten up long,
straight cucumbers are still popular today.
It was during the Victorian era that this craze first appeared Stevenson's
invention was simply an elongated glass funnel that would be placed over the
vegetable in its early stage to encourage it to grow straight.
Just several months into his third marriage.
George Stevenson died on August the 12th, 1848 in his home.
After about a Pursy. He was 67 years old. And to the legacy,
see he left behind was evident immediately,
but only increased as the decades rolled on.
And the true significance of the role of the railway network in a new modern
world became undeniable. So I really hope you found that video. Interesting.
If you did, please do hit that thumbs up bottom below.
Also support this show by supporting our wonderful sponsor Squarespace link to
them below. And thank you for watching.